Hibernate 7 on Quarkus: each new version brings a better database experience (#2338)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2025-06-18-hibernate7-on-quarkus.adoc

---
layout: post
title: 'Hibernate 7 on Quarkus: every new version is a better database experience for the users'
date: 2025-06-18
tags: hibernate, database, jpa
synopsis: A roundup on the new upgrades of Hibernate on Quarkus.
author: lmolteni
---
:imagesdir: /assets/images/posts/hibernate7
ifdef::env-github,env-browser,env-vscode[:imagesdir: ../assets/images/posts/hibernate7]

=== Introduction

> Hibernate is improving at a very fast speed, and so is its Quarkus support, as great database access is a key part of the Quarkus experience.
> The new Quarkus 3.24 release upgrades Hibernate to version 7, a major upgrade that implies some breaking changes, and thus will require some investigation with the https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/migration-guide/migration-guide.html[migration guide] when upgrading.
> Developers working on Hibernate and Quarkus are constantly collaborating, so here’s a quick peek at what has happened in the last months and what Quarkus users might expect in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hibernate is improving at a very fast speed, and so is its integration with Quarkus, as great database access is a key part of the Quarkus experience.
The latest Quarkus 3.24 release upgrades Hibernate to version 7, a major upgrade that implies some breaking changes, and thus will requires paying attention to the https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/migration-guide/migration-guide.html[migration guide] when upgrading.
Developers working on Hibernate and Quarkus are constantly collaborating, so here’s a quick peek at what happened over the last few months and at what Quarkus users might expect in the future.
```

=== License and Governance Updates 
Both Quarkus and Hibernate are now projects of the https://www.commonhaus.org[Commonhaus Foundation], a non-profit organization dedicated to creating a collaborative environment for open-source libraries.

> Since the upgrade to Hibernate 7, Quarkus and all modules of Hibernate now share the same open-source license: the https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0[Apache License Version 2.0]. Implementing a proper open-source approach is crucial to the success of the two projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the upgrade to Hibernate 7, Quarkus and all modules of Hibernate now share the same open-source license: the https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0[Apache License Version 2.0].
```

(Kinda agree with this, in the spirit of "show, don't tell")

=== Hibernate ORM 7.0 Updates

> The new version of Hibernate brings better performance and https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/whats-new/whats-new.html[all kinds of features], some of which improve the developer experience, such as https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/whats-new/whats-new.html#session-find-multiple[using `findMultiple()` and `getMultiple()`] to efficiently fetch entities in batches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new version of Hibernate brings better performance and https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/whats-new/whats-new.html[all kinds of new features], some of which improve the developer experience, such as https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/whats-new/whats-new.html#session-find-multiple[using `findMultiple()` and `getMultiple()`] to efficiently fetch entities in batches.
```

==== Support for Jakarta Data

> https://jakarta.ee/specifications/data/1.0/jakarta-data-1.0[Jakarta Data] is a simpler way to write data accessing applications, and it’s been supported in Quarkus since https://in.relation.to/2024/11/04/data-in-quarkus/[November 2024]. We suggest giving it a try, as it enables a very quick and easy implementation of the DAO/repository patterns, without any boilerplate code and in a type-safe manner. Simply include the `jakarta.data:jakarta.data-api` dependency with the latest version of Quarkus, i.e.:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
https://jakarta.ee/specifications/data/1.0/jakarta-data-1.0[Jakarta Data] is a simpler way to write data-accessing applications, and it’s been supported in Quarkus since https://in.relation.to/2024/11/04/data-in-quarkus/[November 2024]. We suggest giving it a try, as it enables a very quick and easy implementation of the DAO/repository patterns, without any boilerplate code and in a type-safe manner. Simply include the `jakarta.data:jakarta.data-api` dependency with the latest version of Quarkus, i.e.:
```

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
       <groupId>jakarta.data</groupId>
       <artifactId>jakarta.data-api</artifactId>
 </dependency>
----

Here’s an example of how a simple repository can be written:

[source,java]
----
@Repository
public interface Library {

    @Find
    Optional<Book> byIsbn(String isbn);

    @Query("""
            select b.isbn, b.title, listagg(a.name, ' & ')
            from Book b join b.authors a
            group by b
            order by b.isbn
            """)
    List<Summary> summarize();
}
----

This topic deserves a deeper dive, so let us know if you're interested, as we could provide more content.

In the meantime, you can always refer to the https://quarkus.io/version/main/guides/hibernate-orm#jakarta-data-2[dedicated Quarkus guide] to get started quickly, and to the https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/repositories/html_single/Hibernate_Data_Repositories.html[corresponding documentation in Hibernate ORM] for more advanced usage.

==== New Restrictions API

> After the deprecation of the Hibernate Criteria API, developers were still missing its simplicity, so the Hibernate team introduced a new https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/introduction/html_single/Hibernate_Introduction.html#restrictions-and-ordering[Restriction API] that even has new features, such as the possibility to further restrict an already written query using JPQL/HQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the deprecation of the old Hibernate Criteria API, developers were still missing its simplicity, so the Hibernate team introduced a new https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/introduction/html_single/Hibernate_Introduction.html#restrictions-and-ordering[Restriction API] that even has new features, such as the possibility to further restrict an already-written JPQL/HQL query.
```

[source,java]
----
List<Book> books =
    SelectionSpecification.create(Book.class,
        """
            from Book where discontinued = false
        """)
        .restrict(Restriction.startsWith(Book_.title, "hibernate"))
        .sort(Order.desc(Book_.title))
        .createQuery(session)
        .setPage(Page.first(50))
        .getResultList();
----

This feature can also be used with https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/repositories/html_single/Hibernate_Data_Repositories.html#dynamic-restrictions[Hibernate Data Repositories] (the Hibernate implementation of the Jakarta Data API), and create a repository that allows filtering without having to write any JPQL/HQL code:

```java
@Find
List<Book> books(Restriction<Book> restriction,
                 Order<Book> order);
```

When user will call the method, they can pass the `Restriction` objects to filter the wanted book.

```java
var books =
       library.books(Restriction.contains(Book_.title, "Hibernate"),
                     Order.of(_Book.title.ascIgnoreCase(),
                              _Book.isbn.asc()));
```

=== Hibernate Reactive together with Hibernate ORM

> A long-awaited feature is the ability to https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/13425[mix Hibernate ORM and Hibernate Reactive extensions] in the same Quarkus application. Without this feature, making the two extensions coexist required workarounds that are now unnecessary as, since Quarkus 3.2.4, it is now possible to mix the two.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A long-awaited feature is the ability to https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/13425[mix Hibernate ORM and Hibernate Reactive extensions] in the same Quarkus application. Without this feature, making the two extensions coexist required workarounds that are now unnecessary as, since Quarkus 3.2.4, it's now possible to mix the two.
```

> Hibernate Reactive is a powerful reactive data access abstraction, but its advantages vary per project. Instead of dictating usage, we enable users to experiment easily with both Hibernate ORM and Reactive. Projects using Hibernate ORM can add the Reactive extension, create reactive resources reusing mapped entities, running tests and benchmarks, and determine if it suits their specific needs and scalability goals. While using both, it’s easier to choose the most suitable approach for different use cases. Another benefit is that it makes it easier to migrate in small steps from one to the other as necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hibernate Reactive is a powerful reactive data access abstraction, but its advantages vary per project. Instead of dictating usage, we enable users to experiment easily with both Hibernate ORM and Reactive. Projects using Hibernate ORM can add the Reactive extension, create reactive resources reusing mapped entities, run tests and benchmarks, and determine if it suits their specific needs and scalability goals. While using both, it’s easier to choose the most suitable approach for different use cases. Another benefit is that it makes it easier to migrate in small steps from one to the other as necessary.
```

> Panache users will have this possibility in the API as well starting from https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/46096[Panache 2.0]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Panache users will also have this possibility starting from https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/46096[Panache 2.0]
```

=== Injection of the SchemaManager

> The Hibernate Schema Manager is a powerful tool to generate DDL scripts out of Java objects. Its power is now available to be used in Quarkus via a simple injection. This is particularly useful when https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/introduction/html_single/Hibernate_Introduction.html#testing[writing tests] letting you programmatically control when to do schema export, schema validation, data cleanup, and schema cleanup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Hibernate Schema Manager is a powerful tool to generate DDL scripts out of Java objects. Its power is now available to be used in Quarkus via dependency injection. This is particularly useful when https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/introduction/html_single/Hibernate_Introduction.html#testing[writing tests] letting you programmatically control when to do schema export, schema validation, data cleanup, and schema cleanup.
```

=== The Future

> The teams have many plans for the future of the projects: the DevUI of Quarkus will be enhanced with improvements to the developer experience, with the possibility of https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/39584[executing arbitrary HQL queries] to try out the syntax and experiment with test data and https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/43723[generating migration scripts on the fly]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The teams have many plans for the future of these important projects: the DevUI of Quarkus will be enhanced with improvements to the developer experience, with the possibility of https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/39584[executing arbitrary HQL queries] to try out the syntax and experiment with test data and https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/43723[generating migration scripts on the fly]
```

---
layout: post
title: 'Hibernate 7 on Quarkus: every new version is a better database experience for the users'
date: 2025-06-18
tags: hibernate, database, jpa
synopsis: a roundup on the new upgrades of Hibernate on Quarkus
author: lmolteni
---
:imagesdir: /assets/images/posts/hibernate7
ifdef::env-github,env-browser,env-vscode[:imagesdir: ../assets/images/posts/hibernate7]

=== Introduction
Hibernate is improving at a very fast speed, and so is its Quarkus support, as great database access is a key part of the Quarkus experience.
The new Quarkus 3.24 release upgrades Hibernate to version 7, a major upgrade that implies some breaking changes, and thus will require some investigation with the https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/migration-guide/migration-guide.html[migration guide] when upgrading.
Developers working on Hibernate and Quarkus are constantly collaborating, so here’s a quick peek at what has happened in the last months and what Quarkus users might expect in the future.

=== License and Governance Updates 

> Both Quarkus and Hibernate are now projects of the https://www.commonhaus.org[Commonhaus Foundation], a non-profit organization dedicated to the sustainability of open-source libraries.

Reviewer: Re-reading this, this kind of implies that our projects are not sustainable... which is obviously wrong. 

Maybe, still taking from their frontpage:

```suggestion
Both Quarkus and Hibernate are now projects of the https://www.commonhaus.org[Commonhaus Foundation], a non-profit organization dedicated to creating a collaborative environment for open-source libraries.
```

Since the upgrade to Hibernate 7, Quarkus and all modules of Hibernate now share the same open-source license: the https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0[Apache License Version 2.0]. Implementing a proper open-source approach is crucial to the success of the two projects.

=== Hibernate ORM 7.0 Updates
The new version of Hibernate brings better performance and https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/whats-new/whats-new.html[all kinds of features], some of which improve the developer experience, such as https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/whats-new/whats-new.html#session-find-multiple[using `findMultiple()` and `getMultiple()`] to efficiently fetch entities in batches.

==== Support for Jakarta Data

> https://jakarta.ee/specifications/data/1.0/jakarta-data-1.0[Jakarta Data] is a simpler way to write data accessing applications, and it’s supported in Quarkus since https://in.relation.to/2024/11/04/data-in-quarkus/[November 2024]. We suggest giving it a try, as it enables a very quick and easy implementation of the DAO/repository patterns, without any boilerplate code and in a type-safe manner. Simply include the `jakarta.data:jakarta.data-api` dependency with the latest version of Quarkus, i.e.:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
https://jakarta.ee/specifications/data/1.0/jakarta-data-1.0[Jakarta Data] is a simpler way to write data accessing applications, and it’s been supported in Quarkus since https://in.relation.to/2024/11/04/data-in-quarkus/[November 2024]. We suggest giving it a try, as it enables a very quick and easy implementation of the DAO/repository patterns, without any boilerplate code and in a type-safe manner. Simply include the `jakarta.data:jakarta.data-api` dependency with the latest version of Quarkus, i.e.:
```

I think?

[source,java]
----
@Repository
public interface Library {

    @Find
    Optional<Book> byIsbn(String isbn);

    @Query("""
            select b.isbn, b.title, listagg(a.name, ' & ')
            from Book b join b.authors a
            group by b
            order by b.isbn
            """)
    List<Summary> summarize();
}
----

This topic deserves a deeper dive, so let us know if you're interested, as we could provide more content.

In the meantime, you can always refer to the https://quarkus.io/version/main/guides/hibernate-orm#jakarta-data-2[dedicated Quarkus guide] to get started quickly, and to the https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/repositories/html_single/Hibernate_Data_Repositories.html[corresponding documentation in Hibernate ORM] for more advanced usage.

==== New Restrictions API
After the deprecation of the Hibernate Criteria API, developers were still missing its simplicity, so the Hibernate team introduced a new https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/introduction/html_single/Hibernate_Introduction.html#restrictions-and-ordering[Restriction API] that even has new features, such as the possibility to further restrict an already written query using JPQL/HQL.

> [source,text]
> ----
> var books =
>     SelectionSpecification.create(Book.class,
>         """
>             from Book where discontinued = false
>         """)

Reviewer: This seems to make the parser happy, don't ask me why :shrug: 

```suggestion
[source,java]
----
List<Book> books =
    SelectionSpecification.create(Book.class,
        """
            from Book where discontinued = false
        """)
```

        .restrict(Restriction.startsWith(Book_.title, "hibernate"))
        .sort(Order.desc(Book_.title))

>         .fetch(Path.from(Book.class).to(Book_publisher))

Reviewer: I'd remove this in your specific example, it makes things confusing.

```suggestion
```

Developers working on Hibernate and Quarkus are constantly collaborating, so here’s a quick peek at what has happened in the last months and what Quarkus users might expect in the future.

=== License and Governance Updates ===
Both Quarkus and Hibernate are now projects of the https://www.commonhaus.org[Commonhaus Foundation], a non-profit organization dedicated to the sustainability of open-source libraries.
Since the upgrade to Hibernate 7, Quarkus and all modules of Hibernate now share the same open-source license: the https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0[Apache License Version 2.0]. Implementing a proper open-source approach is crucial to the success of the two projects.

=== Hibernate ORM 7.0 Updates ===
The new version of Hibernate brings better performance and https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/whats-new/whats-new.html[all kinds of features], some of which improve the developer experience, such as https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/whats-new/whats-new.html#session-find-multiple[using findMultiple() and getMultiple()] to efficiently fetch entities in batches

> ==== New Restrictions API ====

Reviewer: If you move this below "Jakarta Data", you can mention that restrictions/orders can be used in Jakarta Data -- and perhaps provide an example, because that's pretty neat.
See https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/7.0/repositories/html_single/Hibernate_Data_Repositories.html#dynamic-restrictions

Panache users will have this possibility in the API as well starting from https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/46096[Panache 2.0]

=== Injection of the SchemaManager ===

The Hibernate Schema Manager is a powerful tool to generate DDL scripts out of Java objects. Its power is now available to be used in Quarkus via a simple injection. This is particularly useful when writing tests letting you programmatically control when to do schema export, schema validation, data cleanup, and schema cleanup.

=== The Future ===

The teams have many new ideas for the future of the projects: the DevUI of Quarkus will be enhanced with improvements to the developer experience, with the possibility of https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/39584[executing arbitrary HQL queries] to try out the syntax and experiment with test data and https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/43723[generating migration scripts on the fly]

> image::console.gif[scaledwidth=100%]

Author: Checked it
